Family Planning to Reduce Emissions
September 18, 2007  The Australian

Expanding family planning is one of the cheapest ways of reducing greenhouse emissions and alleviating poverty. A rapid reduction in population growth in developing countries would play a critical role in reducing demand for energy and pressure on other environmental systems. Programs to keep the global population to the low end of growth ranges was often overlooked as an effective response to managing climate change. It was estimated in 1994 that it would cost $17 billion a year to roll out comprehensive family planning strategies in developing countries. Slowing population growth would also alleviate poverty and improve health standards. Family planning is not expensive, we are giving people the ability to make decisions about family sizes.

Pro-choice Lobby Seeks Change in Law to Ease Restrictions on Abortion
August 27, 2007  Guardian (London)

The Global Safe Abortion Conference is being viewed by a coalition of pro-choice charities as a platform to press for reform and will use the London event to highlight proposed changes, including an end to the requirement for two doctors' signatures to have an abortion and permitting licensed nurses or midwives to carry out some abortion procedures. It represents a shift by pro-choice groups in the UK who have not sought a high-profile debate on legal change. Battle lines are being drawn after the government acknowledged that the forthcoming Human Tissues and Embryos Bill could potentially change abortion law. Pro-life campaigners are expected to seek to amend the bill, because scientific advances mean a foetus is now viable earlier. It is likely that pro-choice parliamentarians would respond with amendments at ease restrictions on abortion access. The debate will be heightened by the Commons science and technology committee examining the latest scientific developments relating to abortion. The Marie Stopes conference will highlight a series of objectives, organisers claim, to modernise the law and bring it into the 21st century. Campaigners say a woman should need only one doctor's signature to obtain an abortion. The British Medical Association said one signature was sufficient only in the first trimester. They also want an end to the restriction that only doctors can perform abortions, arguing that non-surgical procedures including medical abortion via the abortion pill could be carried out by trained nurses. Advances in medical care mean that the 40-year-old law is in some ways holding us back from providing the optimum care we could do. Pro-life organisations say abortion levels have risen to 200,000 a year in the UK. An alliance of pro-life charities and church groups, called the conference an overt political gesture, and said its supporters are realising that the country is much more favourable to their position, which is to reduce the number of abortions.
