- - - - - - - -

Report From Africa: Population, Health, Environment, and Conflict
July 03, 2007  Woodrow Wilson International Centre for Scholars Author 

http://allafrica.com/sustainable/resources/view/00011158.pdf

Authors in the latest ECSP Report argue that we should not miss the quiet - yet often more lethal - conflicts for shrinking resources, which are depleted by population growth, environmental degradation, poverty, and over-consumption. Population and health are linked to conflict and fragile states, say report authors. 

Efforts to promote sustainability - and use natural resources as peacebuilding tools - could help turn deadly environments into sustainable neighborhoods. In managing our resources, we need to realize they are limited and need to be managed Sustainable management of the resources is only possible if we practice good governance. That we respect the voice of the minority, while accepting the decision of the majority. 

We call for the strengthening of institutions, such as the United Nations to restrain strong nations so that they do not walk all over the weak ones. When we manage our resources sustainably and practice good governance we promote cultures of peace, which include the willingness to dialogue and make genuine efforts for healing and reconciliation. 

More reading in the 50-page report, a PDF file (follow the link in the headline).

- - - - - - - -

Population Explosion Threatens Development Gains
December 18, 2007  Africa News Service http://allafrica.com/stories/200712110641.html

If the people of Niger remain uninformed about family planning and keep reproducing at the current rate the country's population will quadruple by 2050. Niger's population is counted by the Institute for National Statistics (INS), which calculates the current rate of population growth is 3.3% every year. 

If that growth continues, there will be 56 million people living in Niger by 2050, compared to 13.5 million today. The average number of children per mother is 7.1. When asked how many they would like to have - women said nine and men said 12, but some families said they would like 40 or 50 children. 

This is a society that encourages procreation. Just 5% of Nigeriens use family planning and contraception. The 85% of Nigeriens who currently rely on rain-fed subsistence agriculture, are going to be hardest hit as millions more people compete for the same farmland. Niger's cultivatable land could be less because of soil degradation and the effects of climate change. It has been identified as one of the regions most likely to be adversely affected by climate change. 

The increase in population will accentuate the cereal production and wood-for-fuel deficits which started in the 1980s. Niger's population will also overtake the government's ability to provide adequate health, education, jobs and even water points. The capital Niamey remains small compared to most Sahelian capitals with a population of around 700,000. At least 85% of the Nigerien population relies on rainfed subsistence farming. 94% of Nigeriens live on 35% of the land. 

The most populated areas are along the southern border with Burkina Faso and Mali. The Maradi region holds 20% of the population, some 2,235,748 people, living on 3.3% of the country's land. Niger's desert and mountain north accounts for 53% of Niger's territory but is inhabited by only 3% of the population - 321,639 people. 

Niger's government put in place a "national action plan" to curb population growth. The government wants the number practising family planning to increase from 5% to 15% or 20% by 2015. The plan also calls for information campaigns to educate religious leaders and especially women about the availability and importance of family planning. It proposes that early marriages be cut. Currently, every second girl is married and likely to be procreating before the age of 15. Raising the marriage age to 18 would take up to four years off a woman's reproductive life. 

By 2015 population growth should have slowed to 2.5% and the average number of children produced per woman should be five. If the demographics continue, Niger cannot develop. All the resources will be going into social services and nothing will be left for investing in the economy.